All right, so in this lesson, we're going to learn a little more about exceptions.
Now we won't be going super deep into this because honestly, in this whole entire course, the purpose
is to get you the core knowledge that you need to be useful.
And there are plenty and plenty of professional developers who themselves don't really know a whole
lot about how to properly make use of exceptions, and that doesn't hold them back.
So I'm not trying to inundate you with a ton of knowledge about exceptions, but just give you the core
basics so that you don't feel like you have no idea what's going on.
When we're looking at these, but look at how far we've come in this course already without me really
going into any significant detail about them.
So here we go.
All right.
So there are, generally speaking, three types of exceptions.
First off, let me explain what is an exception.
I've talked about it before, but let me just kind of reiterate.
So basically, any time something can go pretty wrong in your program, an exception can be what we
call thrown.
And what that basically means is an exception can occur.
OK.
There are three general types of exceptions.
There are checked exceptions.
There are runtime exceptions which are said to be unchecked and then there are errors.
We won't be handling errors because there's not a whole lot that you can do about them anyway.
So the main two types of exceptions that you are most likely to encounter from day to day will be checked.
Exceptions and unchecked exceptions.
Checked exceptions are supposed to be situations that occur programmatically that you, as the programmer,
might be able to do something about.
So one example of that is where we've been opening up the file with the five million records and iterating
through it.
Every time we open up that file using the files that lines method, we have to handle the exception
that can occur as a result of us making the call to the lines method.
And I stated before that the exception that can occur there is that the file that we refer to might
not exist.
In fact, let me just open up one of those programs real quick so that we can all be on the same page
here.
OK, so here we are back in the big data class, and you will recall that we were using the files that
lines method to open up our CSV file with five billion plus one header row, five million records in
it.
And every time we make a call to this method, here lines.
This method actually throws an exception and I'm hovering over it so that we can see its Java document.
So you may notice that the signature of this method is defined to return a stream of strings, but it
also throws something called a java o that io exception.
OK.
So we're going to learn a little more about what that actually means, but the basic gist of it is that
it's telling us that, hey, you can call this method, but just know that it is possible that something
could go wrong when you're trying to call this method and you will need to handle that situation.
And that's what this AOA exception is, indicating that when we're dealing with files, there could
be something that goes wrong with the input output, the file stuff.
OK.
So that's what that's saying.
And Throws just says that this method is capable of producing that type of exception.
That kind of that kind of situation is capable of happening when you call the lines method.
OK.
So we'll talk a little bit more about that briefly.
But I just wanted to show you that as a quick reminder.
And then while we're here, though, I might as well show that what we decided to do about it in this
particular case was to surround this line in particular.
But really, we went ahead and just put all of the pertinent code inside of a try catch block, and
we're going to learn more details about that as well.
OK, so for now, though, jumping back over to this other little bit of code that I have here prepared,
let's look at a couple of scenarios here.
So in this code, I've created an array, a string array with and I've initialized it with three values
one, two and three strings.
And then I've also created an integer variable called Numb.
Set it to zero.
And here I am doing a couple of things.
I want to print out the result of some math here.
Get the length of the array, which should be three divided by whatever number I have in this variable
num, which currently is zero.
OK.
And then let's print whatever value is in the third element of this of this array.
All right.
So let's just run this and see what happens.
All right, so it actually blows up immediately and in by blow up, I mean, an exception is generated
and thrown and the exception it says here exception in thread main java ling arithmetic exception.
Forward slash by zero, which means divide divide by zero.
So you may recall from math class that it is impossible to divide by zero or it's considered to be impossible,
at least.
And so the computer won't do that.
It detected that we were trying to do that.
And so it being the JVM generated this arithmetic exception.
OK.
That's why that happened.
And what happens then is that once we get to this line in that arithmetic exception is thrown.
The program just dies.
Right, right then and there.
So this Line six is never even reached because that exception got thrown.
OK.
Now I want to show you something that you kind of could do and just just know before we even start down
this path.
What I'm about to show you here is really just for illustrative purposes.
This this isn't actually, generally speaking, a good idea to do what I'm about to do right now, but
I can handle this exception or I can catch this particular exception.
OK.
And let me show you how I can do that, and there are few ways that I can do this.
So first, I'm going to select this whole entire line and then I will do an option command T.
And what I want to do is I want to surround just that line with a try catch block, and I will explain
what that's really doing and why.
But I'm going to select number six here, or I could click on it for a try catch.
All right.
So now that looks a little messier, but the pertinent thing here is that here's the original line right
there, and now it's inside of a code block.
And this is called a try catch block.
OK, so now we've got this keyword try.
So we're now telling the JVM essentially try executing this line.
And if anything goes wrong, maybe we'll catch it and do something about it down here.
OK.
So now if I run this again, let's see what happens.
OK, so we still have an exception happening here.
The divide by zero, but the next line line 10 is executing now again, I want to state this is generally
not a good idea, and I'll explain a little more about why it's not a great idea to do this.
I'm showing this to you for illustrative purposes so that you can learn how exceptions work and how
they can be caught and when to catch them and how and why, and all of that.
All right.
So what just happened now is that an exception was still generated in throne when the JVM realized that
we were about to attempt a divide by zero operation here.
OK, so it generated the arithmetic exception and it threw it.
But now that we have this try catch block here, we cut the exception.
And so that's why they used these terms to throw and to catch right.
The exception?
You can think of it as an object and it is an object, actually, it's an object that's sort of being
thrown.
And if you set up a catcher to catch it, then you can do something sometimes with that exception,
OK?
In this particular case, all we're doing with it is simply printing its stack trace, and we'll talk
a little more about what a stack traces.
But basically, it's printing the details of the error that occurred, right?
And that's how we get to see this divide by zero.
Now, previously, before I surrounded this line with a try catch, we were still seeing this, this
output here, and that was happening because the exception was being handled by the JVM itself.
Beyond the main method here, we're doing all of this inside of one main method.
OK?
Something called the main method, though.
And so what happened before we had this try catch block here is that the exception was thrown and it
made its way outside of the main method.
And then the JVM were the thing that called our main method handled it.
And in its handling of the method, it displayed the stack trace just like we're doing now.
So you can imagine that whatever the thing is within the JVM that calls main method, it has code that
looks sort of like this as well.
OK.
Now, because we are now handling this method right here, kind of in line like as soon as we call this
this line here because we're handling it and we're not killing the application as a result of it.
This next line is allowed to proceed.
OK, now that might seem like a good idea, but in this particular case, it's not really a good idea
at all, because with this divide by zero happening here, we're not able to fix anything.
All we're doing is just saying, Oh yeah, that divide by zero occurred.
Let's move on.
It's kind of like if your house was on fire and you're driving by and you see your house is on fire
and you say, Oh, look, my house is on fire and then you just keep driving.
It's a lot like that.
That's why in this particular case, this is not a good idea to to do just this right.
I'm not really handling the exception in any way.
All I'm doing is just noting yet there's that exception and I'm printing it out.
Oftentimes, the better thing to do in a case like this might be to just let the program die, which
would be the default behavior of the JVM.
Anyway, as we originally saw before I was catching this, OK?
But anyway, that's what's going on here.
OK, now I want to show you another situation.
So currently we are printing the third element of this array.
Let's see what happens if we try to print an imaginary fourth element of this array.
OK, so now let's run the program.
All right, so now we're getting two exceptions here.
We're getting our familiar divide by zero exception and then we're getting an index out of bounds,
and we've seen this before when we were playing with arrays, I believe so.
Yeah, so it's just telling us we're just trying to access an element that does not exist in this array
of only three elements.
We're trying to get a fourth element and there is no fourth element.
And so that's illegal.
You can't do that.
So we could do the same thing here.
We could select this line and then do an option command T and surrounded with a try catch again.
Right?
And just so that we know that we've changed something in a seemingly useful way.
Let's just add one more system that out here and say, you made it to the end, OK?
And then let's run this.
All right, so we're seeing are you made it to the end message, but we're also seeing these two exceptions
being thrown, OK?
And again, I'm going to say it again what I'm doing here by catching each of these exceptions explicitly
like this, but not really doing anything to attempt to fix the problem other than just printing out
that.
Yet there's that problem generally not a good idea in, in most cases, not a good idea.
All right.
So now that we're doing that?
Let me show you a few other things that we can do.
One thing we could do is to consolidate these try catch blocks so that we would only have one try,
for example.
And so what we can do here is I can take this line that I know is capable of generating a particular
type of exception.
And I can move it up into the first try catch block, right?
And then I'm going to go ahead and just delete those two.
OK, so now that I've done that, let's see what will happen when I run this.
So now we're only seeing one exception here, but we are still making it to the end message here, you
made it to the end.
So the reason for that is because the divide by zero exception is occurring at Line six.
And as soon as that exception occurs, the thread will stop executing any more lines of code within
that try block.
OK, so this next line seven just gets skipped.
And basically, what's happening here is that the thread goes from this line down to line nine and then
from line nine down to line 11, that's effectively what's happening here.
So now let's say that we wanted to go ahead and address this issue here with the divide by zero.
OK, so I'm going to change the NUM variable to a one, for example.
And now let's run it again and see what happens.
OK, now we're still getting an exception, but now we're getting the index three out of bounds for
length three.
So now this line is running and we're seeing that here because we're printing out a three, right?
So Line six is running.
But now when we get to Line seven, which we are getting to line seven now, so that's progress, I
suppose.
But now Line seven is throwing an exception.
And so interestingly, now this line eight catch exception E is capable of handling both of these exceptions
in a somewhat generic way, though.
So now let's talk a little bit about what this catch is really doing.
So basically, what it's saying is if you see an exception of type in this case, exception, then do
whatever I have in this code block here.
OK, so let's talk a little bit about exceptions.
So I said that there are three types of exceptions.
There are checked exceptions, runtime exceptions and errors, checked exceptions and runtime exceptions.
Both extend from the same superclass, which is exception.
And then the exception class itself extends from a superclass called Throw a ball.
Errors, on the other hand, do not extend from exception.
They extend from throw a ball also.
So you've got exception and throw a ball and then under exception, we've got runtime exception.
And actually there's a whole lot of exceptions, but that's the basic hierarchy.
So we are able to say what these catch blocks here, what type of exception we are expecting to catch
and then do something accordingly to that.
Now one thing that's kind of interesting is that we can actually have multiple catch blocks.
OK.
So in this particular case, we see that the actual exception type that got thrown here was not something
called exception.
It was actually something called array index out of bounds exception.
So this is a subclass of exception.
And one interesting thing we can do with this is we could actually be much more specific in what exception
we're actually looking for here.
So I could change this to say array index out of bounds exception.
Like so.
And then we could even change this bit here and say something like.
The array index, blah blah blah was thrown here.
OK.
And so now let me run that and you'll see.
All right.
So we got three and then we got our message the array index, blah blah blah was thrown here.
Now what happens, though, if I return this bit?
Back to zero.
Let's see what that does.
OK, so now we're getting an exception here, and it's the familiar divide by zero exception, which
is an arithmetic exception.
But look now what's happening?
We're not even making it to the end of the program anymore, even though we've got to try catch block
here.
We're not making it to the end of the program anymore.
And the reason for that is because we are no longer catching this arithmetic exception.
Now I know what some of you may be thinking Well, we never were catching an arithmetic exception.
Initially, we were catching just an exception.
And now we're catching an array index out of bounds exception.
We were never explicitly catching an arithmetic exception, and that is true.
We weren't ever catching explicitly an arithmetic exception.
However, since arithmetic exception and array index out of bounds exception, both extend from exception.
And we were explicitly catching exception.
That catch was handling both types and so many more, by the way.
And so that's something for you to make a note of.
You can always catch the more generic exception data type.
OK.
The JVM will honor that.
That can be a good thing.
Sometimes it can also be a bad thing if you're not aware that that could be happening in general.
You do actually want to catch the most specific exception data type that is meaningful for whatever
it is that you're doing, OK?
So what we can do here is if we want to handle either of these cases that are both existing within this
one try block, we can actually specify multiple catches.
So we've got the one there, but we could add another one here to handle the arithmetic exception as
well.
And we'll give ourselves a nice message here to say this is due to the aromatic exception.
Being thrown, all right, so now.
Well, first, let's just run this again.
OK, so now that we've run this again, liquid, now we're getting the message.
This is due to the arithmetic exception being thrown so that this guy here, right?
So it's not this guy here isn't catching because nothing is throwing the array index out of bounds.
However, an arithmetic exception is being thrown.
And now we're catching it and printing a message.
And because we are now handling that exception with this explicit catch here, the program in this case
isn't dying.
It's proceeding on to the next line outside of our try catch block.
OK, now the try catch block is this whole entire thing.
All right.
And so we've got these two catches.
So in general, you can have as many catches as you need to handle, whatever the situations are.
OK, now I want to show you one more thing here.
What if we just had the same message for both of these?
So what if we just said something went terribly wrong, which is not a good thing to say in your catch,
by the way, it's not a helpful message.
We want to know what went wrong and why did it go wrong?
So you actually really want to capture more information, but for the purposes of this stupid, you
know, little tutorial here for right now, let's just say that you wanted to say the same thing, both
in this catch block and in this one as well.
OK.
All right.
So let's run that real quick.
So there we go.
Something went wrong.
So now we don't know where it went wrong, right?
We don't know which one of these catches went wrong, but we know that something went wrong.
So the point here is if we wanted to do basically the same error handling for both for either of these
catches, we could consolidate this because now this is duplicated code.
OK, we're doing the same thing here, essentially.
So what we can do here is implement what's called a multi catch.
And this is a little bit newer functionality.
I think as of either Java eight or nine doesn't really matter too much, but just know that it's not
an old old old versions of Java.
So what we can do is actually combine these two bits into one catch block here, and the way we can
do that is simply within order.
Operator and the or operator is this guy here just the pipe?
And then we can say arithmetic exception like so.
And now notice that this has gone in red because it is redundant.
And so we can actually just get rid of all of that like so.
And so now we're saying if array index out of bounds exception or arithmetic exception are thrown,
let's refer to that exception with this variable called E and then do whatever we're saying to do within
the catch block here, OK?
And so, by the way, that is a variable there.
Sorry, I did not mention that explicitly before we could call this something a little longer.
Right?
Exception.
Right.
And we can even do something with this.
So I did mention these exceptions are actually objects.
And so they have methods on them and properties and things.
And so we can actually access those methods and do stuff with them.
So for example, let's see here we could do something like this.
Let's put a colon there.
And then plus and we'll refer to the exception and we can say, like get message.
Let's see what this does.
OK.
Look at that.
So now we're getting the same message that we were seeing in the stack trace from before.
So we're getting the divide by zero, so that's at least giving us a little bit more of a hint of what
exactly went wrong, right?
Especially since now we're handling it all in the same code with the same single catch, right?
And let's stop that particular error from occurring again by putting a one here and now.
Let's let the other error kind of bubble through, right?
So let's run this again.
All right.
And so now something went terribly wrong index three out of bounds for length.
So at least with this approach, we're able to again kind of get an idea of what is actually going wrong,
right?
Now, we don't know what the exception type was, although we could determine that I suppose what we
could do there is maybe, maybe we could change this to a print death.
And let's see, let's just change this message.
Exception type percent death.
Message percent s.
And a new line like that.
And so now what we'll do is.
So we can grab the type of the class exception that.
Get class.
And then a comma there.
Now, this class is going to return a class, but since we're trying to assign it as a string, the
JVM will call the two string method of the class okay.
So I could explicitly just do that here, I could say to string, but I don't actually have to in this
particular case.
All right.
And then the message there.
So let's see how this works.
All right.
So exception type class array index out of bounds message index three out of bounds.
And so now this is looking a lot like the stack trace that we were seeing before.
Right now, I could even have both.
I could have that there, and then I could also refer to the exception and then say, Prince backtrace,
right?
So we can we can do both here and we'll run that.
So now we're getting our custom message as well as the stack trace, too.
All right.
So let's talk a little bit more about the Stack Trace business now.
So these stack traces are actually quite helpful in this particular case, not so much, because there's
no depth to what we're doing here.
But let me show you this now.
So if we were to take all of this code here and extract it out into a new method, and I will do an
option command m for method.
And I don't know, I will just call this second level.
Well, actually, I should put a verb in here.
I'll just call this do second level.
Like that?
OK.
All right, so now what what I've done is I've created a new method with all of that code in it, right?
All the try catch business here.
But our main method is still going to be the starting point into our program.
So the main method is going to start up and we're going to call this second level method.
It's going to do its thing.
And then if everything were to go right, then we'd wrap it up by returning from that do second level
method and hit the and then execute line four.
OK.
So let's run this and see what what we get here.
All right, so we did make it to the end.
Right.
However, we also got this stack trace.
And if we look at the Stack Trace now, let's see what it's saying here.
So we got that familiar output, but then we got at exception tests that do second level exception test
Java 12, and then we see another line here.
Exception tests dot main.
So what this is showing us is the tracing of the path that our thread took.
And again, I will remind you that a thread is just like this little guy who is actually stepping through
each line of our program and executing those lines, and then he can jump to new lines as needed.
So when our program is running, the thread will start at line to write and it'll it'll bring in, it'll
carry in, so to speak, the any arguments that we passed in.
Then it sees Line three do second level and it knows that this is a method call.
So then the thread jumps down to line eight while line seven or eight.
However, you want to look at it.
And then it starts executing each of these lines.
OK.
All right, so it executes line 11 fine and then it gets down to Line 12, where we are trying to access
an element of this array that does not exist, which causes the JVM to generate the exception.
And so then the thread ends up jumping down to Line 14, where it executes this print death.
And that's what we're seeing here.
And then the thread is told to print the stack trace.
Now this is a little bit of an interesting bit here.
You would expect to see the stack trace next, right?
Then the thread would jump back up to Line four because that's where it left off.
In other words, it would return from this.
Do second level method call and go back to line four and print you made it to the end.
But what we're actually seeing is that the JVM is printing.
You made it to the end before we are seeing this stack trace here.
So just know that the way these stack traces are generated and the timing and order of the thread stuff,
you should not expect that to print out in the exact order that you would intuitively assume it would.
OK, just know that the other thing I want you to notice is that in this stack trace, we're seeing
the most immediate method first.
OK, so it's kind of like the most recently called method will be at the top.
So it's kind of backward to how a lot of people will tend to think.
And I've seen a lot of junior to intermediate developers who have been coding for a few years, and
they seem to still not understand how to read a stack trace.
So maybe like sometimes they'll kind of start at the bottom.
Typically, though, with a stack trace, the line of code where the exception occurred will be at the
top.
And that would make sense, right?
That's where you want to start is where did the problem begin?
But sometimes you want to know, how did we get there, especially if that Stack Trace was generated
due to certain parameters that were being passed in to the secondary method?
And in fact, you know what?
Let me simulate that.
What I can do here is I can take this variable here and we can turn it into a parameter with an option
command p.
OK.
So what I'm doing here is I'm telling the ADP to take this variable here that is currently local to
this method and turn it into a parameter that gets passed into this method instead.
OK.
So I will hit enter.
And so you see that.
And NUM line just disappeared and got replaced as a parameter of this method.
OK.
And that's a really cool capability, by the way.
And not only that, we were explicitly setting that value to a one.
And now with the ad has done is it has come up here to where we're calling this method and it is passed
in that same one.
OK, so it knows that at the end of the day, we don't want any of the functionality to change.
We just wanted to change how we're calling this.
And so we've introduced this value of one here so that, you know, we're not actually functionally
changing anything.
But now having done that, if I change this to a zero.
And then run this again.
All right, so now with our stack trace, we see that we're getting a divide by zero.
So the way that you'd want to use the stack trace to analyze this is you'd say, OK, we're getting
a divide by zero where and so you'd see this very first line here and you'd click on that so you can
actually click on that and it takes us right here to this line.
OK.
And so we can see, oh, so number is zero.
And now we can see that that zero of NUM was passed in to the do second level method.
Now it could be in some programs that lots of other methods may all be capable of calling this method.
And in that case, you wouldn't necessarily know well which calling method was it that called this one
and passed in a zero.
And that's where the Stack Trace can be really, really helpful because you want to know which method
was it that called me that passed in this bad information, right?
This zero?
And so you can come down here and see, well, the guy who called this one is this one here.
The exception test main.
OK.
And it was called on line three.
So now I can click on this and that takes me straight to Line three, where I can see, Ah, OK, someone
explicitly passed a zero in.
OK.
So does that make sense?
So we could have multiple methods defined in this class or in other classes that are all capable of
calling this do second level?
And some of those methods might pass in numbers that don't result in a divide by zero.
But this particular method did.
The main method did, and we'd want to know which method passed this in so that we can analyze and figure
out how to stop that from happening again.
OK, so let's talk a little bit more about these different types of exceptions.
So far, we're looking at this array index out of bounds and the arithmetic exception.
These two exceptions are actually both runtime exceptions, and that means that they don't actually
have to be caught.
As you already saw when we first started writing this, I'm going to just comment these out.
Like so and there are no errors here right now.
If I run this, it's going to blow up, of course.
But my point here is that Java is not forcing me to surround any of these lines with a try catch block.
And that is because of a couple of things.
First off, the IED and Java do not know at this point in time that either of these calls could result
in an exception.
It won't know that until runtime when we're actually running the the code.
And that's one of the reasons why the type of exceptions that can be thrown from these kinds of errors
are runtime exceptions.
They can't easily be known before you start running.
I mean, a human could analyze this particular code and see that we're passing a zero in and we're about
to try to do a divide by zero.
And that is a no no.
Yes, a human could analyze this and see that.
But the JVM can't really see it until you actually do it.
And there's no guarantee that every time you divide by this variable that it's always going to be zero.
Like I said earlier, you can have additional methods that could call this passing and other things
right.
So that's runtime exceptions.